Update plugin dev setup docs. Also add link to plugin docs in contribution docs (#661)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/extend/plugins/developer-workflow.md

---
title: "Developer Workflow"
date: 2020-07-11T23:00:00-04:00
weight: 3
subsection: Plugins
---

### Common `make` commands

- `make dist` - Compile the plugin into a g-zipped file, ready to upload to a Mattermost server. The file is saved in the plugin repo's `dist` folder.
- `make deploy` - Compiles the plugin using the `make dist` command, then automatically deploys the plugin to the Mattermost server
- `make watch` - Uses webpack's watch feature to re-compile and deploy the webapp portion of your plugin on any change to the `webapp/src` folder
- `make test` - Runs the plugin's server tests and webapp tests
- `make check-style` - Runs linting checks on the plugin's server and webapp folders
- `make enable` - Enables the plugin on the Mattermost server
- `make disable` - Disables the plugin on the Mattermost server
- `make reset` - Disables and re-enables the plugin on the Mattermost server
- `make debug-plugin` - Starts a `delve` process and attaches it to your running plugin

> You can run the development build of the plugin by setting the environment variable `MM_DEBUG=1`, or prefixing the variable at the beginning of the `make` command. For example, `MM_DEBUG=1 make deploy` will deploy the development build of the plugin to your server, allowing you to have a more fluid debugging experience. To instead use the production build of the plugin, unset the `MM_DEBUG` environment variable before running the `make` commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can run the development build of the plugin by setting the environment variable `MM_DEBUG=1`, or prefixing the variable at the beginning of the `make` command. For example, `MM_DEBUG=1 make deploy` will deploy the development build of the plugin to your server, allowing you to have a more fluid debugging experience. To use the production build of the plugin instead, unset the `MM_DEBUG` environment variable before running the `make` commands.
```

> ### Exposing the Mattermost server using `ngrok`

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should mention https://localhost.run as an alternative for ngrok? I prefer this one because you don't need to install anything. You just have to run a command, e.g.:
`ssh -R 80:localhost:8065 ssh.localhost.run`
I was using it when developing S4B plugin and it worked very well :+1: .

Author: How does this work if there is an external service involved like Jira Cloud or GitHub? Can that service access your local server through `localhost.run`?

Reviewer 2: Sure. It works like ngrok. For example, the result of this command:
`ssh -R 80:localhost:8065 ssh.localhost.run`
Will be this:
`Connect to http://grzegorz-d8490c28.localhost.run`
By using the address `grzegorz-d8490c28.localhost.run`, external services have access to your local server running on port 8065.

Author: @kosgrz This is really cool! It even supports an `https` endpoint. I will still recommend ngrok due to the debugging tools it gives you to analyze the requests/responses, but I will mention this tool as well. Thanks for mentioning this!

> When a public integrates with an external service, webhooks and/or authentication redirects are necessary, which requires your local server to be available on the web. In order for your Mattermost server to be available to process webhook requests, it needs to expose its port to an external address. A common way to do this is to use the command line tool [ngrok](https://ngrok.com). Follow these steps to set up `ngrok` with your server:

Reviewer: I think there's a missing word after "public".

Author: That's supposed to say "plugin" instead of "public" :)

> When a public integrates with an external service, webhooks and/or authentication redirects are necessary, which requires your local server to be available on the web. In order for your Mattermost server to be available to process webhook requests, it needs to expose its port to an external address. A common way to do this is to use the command line tool [ngrok](https://ngrok.com). Follow these steps to set up `ngrok` with your server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a plugin integrates with an external service, webhooks and/or authentication redirects are necessary, which requires your local server to be available on the web. In order for your Mattermost server to be available to process webhook requests, it needs to expose its port to an external address. A common way to do this is to use the command line tool [ngrok](https://ngrok.com). Follow these steps to set up `ngrok` with your server:
```

> - Download the `ngrok` tool from [here](https://ngrok.com/download)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Download the ngrok tool from [here](https://ngrok.com/download).
```

Author: I feel like it makes sense to have "ngrok" in the code quotes. It's a technical product that stands out when formatted using the code format. I'll change if you still think it should be changed :+1:

Reviewer: I agree that having it stand out is useful especially as it's a lowercase product name. That said, the code format is used for commands/fields/values and so on and having ngrok in code format implies it's one of those ([as per the style guide](https://handbook.mattermost.com/operations/operations/company-processes/publishing/publishing-guidelines/voice-tone-and-writing-style-guidelines/documentation-style-guide#text-formatting)). I'm 5/5 on this but open to suggestions around making it stand out more (bearing in mind that any formatting applied to this product name would need to be applied to all other products/tools we mention in our docs).

Reviewer 3: `ngonk` is both a product name and a command. Given that your audience here are developers who use `ngonk` as a command via a shell, it makes sense to mark is as such.

Author: @justinegeffen What's your opinion on this given Ben's input above?

Reviewer: That makes sense, I'm happy to go with that.

> - Put the executable somewhere within your shell's `PATH`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Put the executable somewhere within your shell's `PATH`.
```

> - Run `ngrok http 8065` to make your Mattermost server available for webhook requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Run `ngrok http 8065` to make your Mattermost server available for webhook requests.
```

> - Set your Mattermost server's [Site URL](http://localhost:8065/admin_console/environment/web_server) to the `https` address given from the `ngrok` command output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set your Mattermost server's [Site URL](http://localhost:8065/admin_console/environment/web_server) to the `https` address given from the `ngrok` command output.
```

> - Monitor webhook requests coming in with ngrok's request inspector. Visit [http://localhost:4040](http://localhost:4040) once you have your tunnel open. You can analyze the contents of the HTTP request from the external service, and the response from your plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Monitor incoming webhook requests with ngrok's request inspector. Visit [http://localhost:4040](http://localhost:4040) once you have your tunnel open. You can analyze the contents of the HTTP request from the external service, and the response from your plugin.
```

> If you are using a free `ngrok` account, the URL given by the output of the `ngrok http` command will be different each time you run the command. As a result, you will need to adjust the webhook URL on Mattermost's side and the external service's side (i.e. GitHub) each time you run the command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using a free ngrok account, the URL given by the output of the `ngrok http` command will be different each time you run the command. As a result, you'll need to adjust the webhook URL on Mattermost's side and the external service's side (e.g. GitHub) each time you run the command.
```

> With this setup, many integrations require you to be logged into Mattermost using your ngrok URL. After logging into your `ngrok` URL pointed to your Mattermost server, you can in most cases continue using your `localhost` address in your browser for quicker network requests to your server. If you receive an error like `unauthorized` or `enable third-party cookies` when connecting to an external service, make sure you are logged into your `ngrok` URL in the same browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this setup, many integrations require you to be logged into Mattermost using your ngrok URL. After logging into your ngrok URL pointed to your Mattermost server, in most cases you can continue using your localhost address in your browser for quicker network requests to your server. If you receive an error like `unauthorized` or `enable third-party cookies` when connecting to an external service, make sure you're logged into your ngrok URL in the same browser.
```

Reviewer: "After logging into your ngrok URL pointed to your Mattermost server, in most cases you can continue using your localhost address in your browser for quicker network requests to your server."

Question: Is there any config that needs to be done on the ngrok side in terms of setting up pointing? Or would you log into ngrok, and then log into Mattermost?

Author: My wording is off here. This is what is happening:

- Start the Mattermost server
- Run `ngrok http 8065`
- Visit https://mickmister.ngrok.io (in my case)
- I am now at my local server's login screen, or at the chat if I had already signed in using the same ngrok URL.

"logging into your ngrok URL" means
1. visit your ngrok URL
2. log into your Mattermost instance after the page loads

Reviewer: I missed this comment, @mickmister, apologies for that. Would these steps be known to the reader or should we add them? I'm 3/5 - more info is always helpful.

### Debugging server-side plugins using `delve`

> Using the `make debug-plugin` command will allow you to use a debugger and step through the plugin's server code. A [delve](https://github.com/go-delve/delve) process will be created and attach to your plugin. You can then use an IDE or debug console to connect to the `delve` process. If you are using VSCode, you can use this `launch.json` configuration to connect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the `make debug-plugin` command to open a debugger and step through the plugin's server code. A [delve](https://github.com/go-delve/delve) process will be created and attach to your plugin. You can then use an IDE or debug console to connect to the `delve` process. If you're using VSCode, you can use this `launch.json` configuration to connect.
```

Reviewer: Note: Not sure if my suggestion changes the meaning of the first sentence.

Author: It does change the meaning a bit. The developer has to "open their remote debugger" on their own after running the command.

Reviewer: Gotcha. You can disregard my suggestion then. :)

```json
{
    "name": "Attach remote",
    "type": "go",
    "request": "attach",
    "mode": "remote",
    "port": 2346,
    "host": "127.0.0.1",
    "apiVersion": 2
}
```

If the debugger is paused for more than 5 seconds, the RPC connection with the server times out. The server cannot communicate with the plugin anymore, so the plugin then needs to be restarted.

> In order to be able to pause the debugger for more than 5 seconds, two modifications need to be done to the `mattermost-server` repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to be able to pause the debugger for more than 5 seconds, two modifications need to be done to the `mattermost-server` repository:
```

> 1. The plugin health check job needs to be disabled. This can be done by commenting out the `go job.run()` line in [mattermost-server/plugin/environment.go](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/blob/master/plugin/environment.go#L510). Note that if your plugin crashes, you will need to restart it, using `make reset` for example. This will also kill any currently running `delve` process. If you want to continue debugging with `delve`, you will need to run `make debug-plugin` again after restarting the plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The plugin health check job needs to be disabled. This can be done by commenting out the `go job.run()` line in [mattermost-server/plugin/environment.go](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/blob/master/plugin/environment.go#L510). Note that if your plugin crashes, you'll need to restart it, using `make reset` for example. This will also kill any currently running `delve` process. If you want to continue debugging with `delve`, you'll need to run `make debug-plugin` again after restarting the plugin.
```

> 1. The plugin health check job needs to be disabled. This can be done by commenting out the `go job.run()` line in [mattermost-server/plugin/environment.go](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/blob/master/plugin/environment.go#L510). Note that if your plugin crashes, you will need to restart it, using `make reset` for example. This will also kill any currently running `delve` process. If you want to continue debugging with `delve`, you will need to run `make debug-plugin` again after restarting the plugin.

Reviewer 4: Should we instead direct developers to disable `PluginSettings.EnableHealthCheck`?

> 2. The `go-plugin`'s RPC client needs to be configured with a larger timeout duration. You can change the code at [mattermost-server/vendor/github.com/hashicorp/rpc_client.go](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/blob/bf03f391e635b0b9b129768cec5ea13c571744fa/vendor/github.com/hashicorp/go-plugin/rpc_client.go#L63) to increase the duration. Here's the change you can make to extend the timeout to 5 minutes:

Reviewer 4: Should we edit the Mattermost server to make this configurable instead?

Author: @lieut-data Maybe, but it does need modifications to the vendor package either way. There's no way we can configure the timeout because `go-plugin` does not support a way to pass in a configuration for it. Maybe worth an upstream change?

Author: @lieut-data Any ideas on how to approach this? The `go-plugin` library needs to be modified directly. If we manually modify the existing version in the `vendor` folder, I'm concerned that the changes will be overwritten if the dependency is updated down the road.
